


# The dark side of stress (learned helplessness)

Acetylcholine is the "neurotransmitter" of cholinergic nerves, including the parasympathetic system.
Cholinesterase (or acetylcholinesterase) is an enzyme that destroys acetylcholine, limiting the action of the cholinergic nerves.
Attaching a phosphate group to the cholinesterase enzyme inactivates it, prolonging and intensifying the action of cholinergic stimulation.
---
The autonomic nervous system has traditionally been divided into the sympathetic-adrenergic system, and the parasympathetic-cholinergic system, with approximately opposing functions, intensifying energy expenditure and limiting energy expenditure, respectively. The hormonal system and the behavioral system interact with these systems, and each is capable of disrupting the others. Disruptive factors in the environment have increased in recent decades.
---
Living is development; the choices we make create our individuality. If genetically identical mice grow up in a large and varied environment, small differences in their experience will affect cell growth in their brains, leading to large differences in their exploratory behavior as they age (Freund, et al., 2013). Geneticists used to say that "genes determine our limits," but this experiment shows that an environment can provide both limitations and opportunities for expanding the inherited potential. If our environment restricts our choices, our becoming human is thwarted, the way rats' potentials weren't discovered when they were kept in the standard little laboratory boxes. An opportunity to be complexly involved in a complex environment lets us become more of what we are, more humanly differentiated.
A series of experiments that started at the University of California in 1960 found that rats that lived in larger spaces with various things to explore were better at learning and solving problems than rats that were raised in the standard little laboratory cages (Krech, et al., 1960). Studying their brains, they found that the enzyme cholinesterase, which destroys the neurotransmitter, acetylcholine, was increased. They later found that the offspring of these rats were better learners than their parents, and their brains contained more cholinesterase. Their brains were also larger, with a considerable thickening of the cortex, which is considered to be the part mainly responsible for complex behavior, learning and intelligence.
These processes aren't limited to childhood. For example, London taxi drivers who learn all the streets in the city develop a larger hippocampus, an area of the brain involved with memory.
The 1960s research into environmental enrichment coincided with political changes in the US, but it went against the dominant scientific ideas of the time. Starting in 1945, the US government had begun a series of projects to develop techniques of behavior modification or mind control, using drugs, isolation, deprivation, and torture. In the 1950s, psychiatry often used lobotomies (about 80,000, before they were generally discontinued in the 1980s) and electroconvulsive "therapy," and university psychologists tortured animals, often as part of developing techniques for controlling behavior.
The CIA officially phased out their MKultra program in 1967, but that was the year that Martin Seligman, at the University of Pennsylvania, popularized the idea of "learned helplessness." He found that when an animal was unable to escape from torture, even for a very short time, it would often fail to even try to escape the next time it was tortured. Seligman's lectures have been attended by psychologists who worked at Guantanamo, and he recently received a no-bid Pentagon grant of $31,000,000, to develop a program of "comprehensive soldier fitness," to train marines to avoid learned helplessness.
Curt Richter already in 1957 had described the "hopelessness" phenomenon in rats (“a reaction of hopelessness is shown by some wild rats very soon after being grasped in the hand and prevented from moving. They seem literally to give up,”) and even how to cure their hopelessness, by allowing them to have an experience of escaping once (Richter, 1957, 1958).  Rats which would normally be able to keep swimming in a tank for two or three days, would often give up and drown in just a few minutes, after having an experience of "inescapable stress." Richter made the important discovery that the hearts of the hopeless rats slowed down before they died, remaining relaxed and filled with blood, revealing the dominant activity of the vagal nerve, secreting acetylcholine.